---
tags:
  - essay
  - en
layout: essay
title: From Good to Great
date: 2020-12-16 11:02:00 -05:00
---

I’ve been thinking about things that bring meaning to life. More specific, how
to identify projects that are worth the time and effort.

Time, after all, is our most valuable and finite resource, so a key aspect of a
good life is to optimize spending time on the right things. But when it comes to
work, which is where we spend most of our time awake, we almost always throw
away the biggest chunks of our years down the drain.

The vast majority of people do their work out of necessity. Bills must be paid,
families must be taken care of. These people have jobs. They don’t enjoy or find
purpose in what they do.

Working on something you actually like is a luxury that only a few of us have.
These are the ones with careers. They might have some fun at work, but they
don’t necessarily see a greater purpose in the outcomes of that time and effort.

Ever so rarely, though, a few among us get the chance to create something truly
special that impacts the world. That’s not a simple job out of duty, and not
just a career. These people have a calling.

I reflect about these differences in my own life. I have spent too much of my
time doing things out of routine, drifting in an ocean of low or aimless effort
that get nowhere. Way too often work was just an escape, a wasteful comfort
zone, a fast-forward button so days go by quick and a paycheque arrives at the
end of the month. Today I see that identifying when we have a calling in life
and responding to it properly is key to make the most out of the time we are
given.

I observe some qualities in individuals who answer to such calling. The first
quality they have is faith in their pursuits. They truly believe in the
potential of the idea they are chasing after. Even when surrounded by criticism
and doubters, the ones who end up making a difference are those who don’t give
up. They have faith that their projects will make a difference, that they will
revolutionize their own lives and in the lives of others.

Another quality I see in innovators is that they don’t settle for mediocre
results. Because of their belief of the disruptive power of their ideas, they
know they are not quite there unless it is amazing. So they continue to iterate.
They are hungry to deliver something truly special. Doing something good is not
enough; they are pursuing greatness.

These two qualities combined (believing in your idea and deep dedication), are
key for remarkable creativity. Those are the ingredients that creates the flow,
that mental zone of high concentration and passion. The kind of work that
blurries out professional and personal life borders. You are no longer doing
something for the money, or as an escape, but because it is worth your life.

If, like me, you want to make the most out of life, you must reflect on whatever
your efforts are at the moment and ask yourself: is this really worth continuing
or should I quit altogether? And the answer lies in assessing your commitment to
going from good to great. On making something that could change your life, or
other people’s lives. If whatever you are pursuing, building, or developing,
does not fit a notion of greatness, then it is not worth pursuing.

If you’re doing some average work, something you won’t be proud of, you are
simply wasting the most valuable resource you possess: your time in this world.
Therefore, filtering out the good and and keeping the great is one of the most
crucial reflections we can make in order to optimize our time and effort while
alive.

I recall two concepts that help back this rationale. The first one comes from
The Dip, from Seth Godin. In it, Godin teaches “when to stick and when to quit”.
According o the book, the answer lies in one’s ability to be “the best in the
world” in whatever they are doing. Of course, being the best is subjective, as
well as your own notion of “world”. I translate “being the best in the world” as
elevating your passion in your endeavour to a deep commitment to perfection and
success.

The second concept is the Pareto principle, also known as the 80/20 rule. It
states a relationship between outcomes and causes in which around 20% of the
causes are responsible for 80% of the consequences. This proportion was observed
in multiple fields, from economics to health and safety, and I believe it can
also be applied to one’s individual efforts as well. Meaning 80% of your success
came from 20% of your efforts and time you spent in your pursuits. So finding
your “vital few” is crucial to prioritize and understand the your qualities,
talents, and what exactly deserves your time.

Today I celebrate yet another trip around the Sun. I am grateful for everything
I was able to accomplish so far, and the opportunities and learnings I received.
For my future self, I leave this note of advice: pursue greatness. Focus on your
vital few. Keep on dreaming. Be the best in your own world.
