---
tags: rails
layout: rails-page
title: Extensions
date: 2021-02-01
---

The new layers presented in this document were introduced in the context of a
simple, small Blog app in Rails. In the real world, however, apps are much more
complex than just a set of synchronous CRUD operations. This section showcases
how to organize business logic objects in other common cases and additional
layers.

## Associations

In this architecture, all persistence and database concerns are encapsulated
under the Repository layer. The goal of this design is to have the business
logic sending singular messages to a Repository for any query or writes to the
database, and receive read-only Model instances as a result. There is no lazy
loading whatsoever, as all data requested is fetched at once; there is also no
method chaining that would end up allowing the business logic layer to compose
its own queries with artifacts such as scopes and filters either. Repositories
expose public methods for every single kind of query and operation required by
the business logic.

This design affects directly how associations are implemented in a Rails app.
Models do not have knowledge about how to load associated objects, nor do they
know how to fetch Records at all. It is up to the Repository to perform the
proper query with foreign keys in the database and instantiate the Models with
the proper attributes and nested structures.

To better showcase associations, let’s implement an example in the Blog app. We
create Comments as Records that belong to Articles. Comments have an Article ID
as an attribute, which is the foreign key to an Article. Comments can be created
and deleted in the context of an Article, and these endpoints are nested in the
Article’s resourceful routes:

```ruby
Rails.application.routes.draw do
  resources :articles do
    resources :comments, only: [:new, :create, :destroy]
  end
end
```

With nested resources we are ensured that all actions in Comments Controller
will have an Article ID as parameter. This is used to instantiate the Comment
Input so the Comment is created for the target Article in the Create Comment
Action, which returns a Comment as the Result.

```ruby
class CommentInput
  include ActiveModel::Model

  attr_accessor :article_id, :author, :body

  validates :article_id, presence: true
  validates :author, presence: true
  validates :body, presence: true, length: { minimum: 10 }
end
```

```ruby
class CommentsController < ApplicationController
  def new
    @input = CommentInput.new(article_id: params[:article_id])
  end

  def create
    @input = CommentInput.new(
      comment_params.merge(article_id: params[:article_id])
    )

    @result = CreateCommentAction.new.perform(@input)

    if @result.success?
      redirect_to(
        article_path(@result.comment.article_id),
        notice: 'Comment was successfully created.'
      )
    else
      render(:new)
    end
  end

  def destroy
    DeleteCommentAction.new.perform(params[:id])
    redirect_to(
      article_path(params[:article_id]),
      notice: 'Comment was successfully destroyed.'
    )
  end

  private

  def comment_params
    params.require(:comment_input).permit(:author, :body)
  end
end
```

Note that neither the Comment Model nor the Comment Repository have any coupling
with Article. All they handle is the Article ID as a simple numeric attribute
with no extra knowledge about what it is used for.

```ruby
class Comment
  attr_reader :id, :article_id, :author, :body

  def initialize(id:, article_id:, author:, body:)
    @id = id
    @article_id = article_id
    @author = author
    @body = body
  end
end
```

```ruby
class CommentRepository
  def create(input)
    record = CommentRecord.create!(
      article_id: input.article_id, author: input.author, body: input.body
    )
    to_model(record.attributes)
  end

  def delete(id)
    record = CommentRecord.find(id)
    record.destroy!
  end

  private

  def to_model(attributes)
    Comment.new(**attributes.symbolize_keys)
  end
end
```

The usefulness of the Article ID comes when we want to render all Comments for
an Article in the show page, as well as render the number of Comments each
Article has in the index page. We start by defining the association in the
Article Record:

```ruby
class ArticleRecord < ApplicationRecord
  self.table_name = 'articles'

  has_many :comment_records, foreign_key: :article_id, dependent: :destroy
end
```

Next we give Article Repository the ability to compose Articles with associated
Comments. We want to change the `#all` method to return all Articles each with
its own list of Comments. This method will take care of crafting an optimized
query with proper joins so we avoid the N+1 problem. We also want to have the
ability to fetch a particular Article loaded with Comments, but instead of
changing `#find`, we create a new `#find_with_comments` method. That’s because
not all Actions need to have a list of Comments all the time. For example, when
we fetch the Article for the edit page the list of Comments is unnecessary.

```ruby
class ArticleRepository
  def all
    ArticleRecord.all.includes(:comment_records).map do |record|
      comments = record.comment_records.map do |comment_record|
        to_comment_model(comment_record.attributes)
      end

      to_model(record.attributes.merge(comments: comments))
    end
  end

  def create(input)
    record = ArticleRecord.create!(
      title: input.title, email: input.email, body: input.body
    )
    to_model(record.attributes)
  end

  def find(id)
    record = ArticleRecord.find(id)
    to_model(record.attributes)
  end

  def find_with_comments(id)
    record = ArticleRecord.find(id)

    comments = record.comment_records.map do |comment_record|
      to_comment_model(comment_record.attributes)
    end

    to_model(record.attributes.merge(comments: comments))
  end

  def update(id, input)
    record = ArticleRecord.find(id)
    record.update!(
      title: input.title, email: input.email, body: input.body
    )
    to_model(record.attributes)
  end

  def delete(id)
    record = ArticleRecord.find(id)
    record.destroy!
  end

  private

  def to_model(attributes)
    Article.new(**attributes.symbolize_keys)
  end

  def to_comment_model(attributes)
    Comment.new(**attributes.symbolize_keys)
  end
end
```

The Article Model must be changed in order to receive an array of Comments
during initialization. As mentioned before, associations are optionally loaded
by the Repository, meaning that the Model’s associations are optional
attributes. Therefore, it is important to ensure that only Model instances
previously initialized with associations can actually respond to an association
message, so we will make the Model raise an error in case someone requests a
list of Comments to an Article that was not initialized with one.

```ruby
class Article
  class AssociationNotLoadedError < StandardError; end

  attr_reader :id, :title, :email, :body, :created_at, :updated_at

  def initialize(id:, title:, email:, body:, created_at:, updated_at:, comments: nil)
    @id = id
    @title = title
    @email = email
    @body = body
    @created_at = created_at
    @updated_at = updated_at
    @comments = comments
  end

  def comments
    raise AssociationNotLoadedError if @comments.nil?
    @comments
  end
end
```

The Show Article Action now can request an Article along with its Comments by
sending the proper message to the Article Repository.

```ruby
class ShowArticleAction < Action
  expose :article

  def perform(id)
    @article = ArticleRepository.new.find_with_comments(id)
  end
end
```

The Controller won’t need to be changed at all, since it simply extracts the
Article from the Result and forwards it to the view. The view now can render the
Comments by reading the Model’s attribute.

```erb
<p id="notice"><%= notice %></p>

<p>
 <strong>Title:</strong>
 <%= @result.article.title %>
</p>

<p>
 <strong>Body:</strong>
 <%= @result.article.body %>
</p>

<%= link_to 'Edit', edit_article_path(@result.article.id) %> |
<%= link_to 'Back', articles_path %>

<h3>Comments</h3>

<% @result.article.comments.each do |comment| %>
 <p>
   <strong><%= comment.author %> says:</strong>
 </p>

 <p><%= comment.body %></p>

 <%= button_to 'Delete', article_comment_path(@result.article.id, comment.id), method: :delete %>
<% end %>

<%= link_to 'Create comment', new_article_comment_path(@result.article.id) %>


The index view can also now render the Comments count for each Article:
<p id="notice"><%= notice %></p>

<h1>Articles</h1>

<table>
 <thead>
   <tr>
     <th>Title</th>
     <th>Email</th>
     <th>Body</th>
     <th>Comments count</th>
     <th colspan="3"></th>
   </tr>
 </thead>

 <tbody>
   <% @result.articles.each do |article| %>
     <tr>
       <td><%= article.title %></td>
       <td><%= article.email %></td>
       <td><%= article.body %></td>
       <td><%= article.comments.count %></td>
       <td><%= link_to 'Show', article_path(article.id) %></td>
       <td><%= link_to 'Edit', edit_article_path(article.id) %></td>
       <td><%= button_to 'Destroy', article_path(article.id), method: :delete, data: { confirm: 'Are you sure?' } %></td>
     </tr>
   <% end %>
 </tbody>
</table>

<br>

<%= link_to 'New Article', new_article_path %>
```

Note that since we are just rendering the number of Comments, having all these
Models loaded in each Article is actually a waste of resources. A more optimized
design could be made by adding a comments count attribute in Article and setting
it in the Article Repository. But the overall design principle remains the same:
Repositories return immutable, read-only Model instances with the data properly
mapped.

As mentioned before, associations are not required to be loaded for every single
use case. For instance, when we render the edit page to update an Article: only
the Article that is supposed to be edited is fetched to prefill the form, but
not its Comments. That is why it is crucial to have specific Action objects
handling specific requests: each Action takes care of only fetching what is
necessary for each use case by sending the proper message to the Repository.

## Mailers

Rails apps often need to send emails as part of handling a request, which is
done through the Action Mailer framework. Mailer classes receive data as
parameters and render the body of emails to be sent using views. Therefore,
Mailers should be limited to hold logic related to composing emails alone, and
coupling with business logic objects such as Actions and Repositories should be
avoided.

Back to the Blog example, let’s say we want to notify a user that a new Comment
was posted in one of their Articles. After introducing a new email attribute in
Articles, we can create a Mailer to send the email. The Mailer will be invoked
when a new Comment is created in the Create Comment Action, with the data it
needs already fetched: the Comment to be included in the message as well the
Article that has the email address of the author.

```ruby
class NotificationMailer < ApplicationMailer
  default from: 'notifications@example.com'

  def new_comment
    @article = params[:article]
    @comment = params[:comment]
    mail(to: @article.email, subject: 'New comment in your article')
  end
end
```

```erb
Hello!

<%= @comment.author %> just posted the following comment in your article
"<%= @article.title %>":

<%= @comment.body %>
```

```ruby
class CreateCommentAction < ApplicationAction
  expose :comment

  def perform(input)
    if input.valid?
      @comment = CommentRepository.new.create(input)
      article = ArticleRepository.new.find(@comment.article_id)
      NotificationMailer.with(
        comment: @comment, article: article
      ).new_comment.deliver_now
    else
      failure(input.errors)
    end
  end
end
```

Note that the approach above only works for synchronous email deliveries (the
ones performed with `#deliver_now`). Mailers have the ability to deliver emails
through a background job, but that would require arguments to be serializable
according to Active Job’s expectations, such as using Global ID. We are using
Models as parameters, and those do not meet the API requirements by design.
Instead, for asynchronous email deliveries with Models, we should implement our
own jobs to properly retrieve the required data later in the background, and
still perform email deliveries synchronously in the job queue.

## Background Jobs

Jobs are used to defer part of the business logic for later execution. They are
enqueued with certain parameters that are serialized, and eventually performed
in a background queue, which deserializes the parameters and calls the Job.
Active Job is the Rails framework that provides the APIs for this workflow so
the app can be abstracted away from the specifics of the background queue in
use.

In this architecture, we identify Jobs as being part of the business logic layer
of the app, integrated with the Action workflow. Jobs are simply a subset of an
Action’s content that is deferred to be performed asynchronously: their
arguments are already validated and part of the request processing workflow.

Another key difference between Actions and Jobs is that Jobs don’t return any
values. Instead, they define retry mechanisms for eventual failures. The
business logic performed by Jobs should take this into account and be designed
to be idempotent and retried without unwanted side-effects.

Let’s revisit the Blog app and introduce a Job so we can perform the email
delivery in the background.

```ruby
class NewCommentEmailJob < ApplicationJob
  queue_as :default

  def perform(comment_id)
    comment = CommentRepository.new.find(comment_id)
    article = ArticleRepository.new.find(comment.article_id)
    NotificationMailer.with(comment: comment, article: article)
      .new_comment.deliver_now
  end
end
```

```ruby
class CreateCommentAction < Action
  expose :comment

  def perform(input)
    if input.valid?
      @comment = CommentRepository.new.create(input)
      NewCommentEmailJob.perform_later(@comment.id)
    else
      failure(input.errors)
    end
  end
end
```

A benefit of moving part of the business logic from Create Comment Action into
New Comment Email Job is that it ended up reducing the coupling between the
Action and other objects of the system: the Action no longer needs to call
Article Repository or the Mailer. These are now part of the Job’s business
logic.

## GraphQL

An increasing number of contemporary Rails apps have adopted GraphQL as their
API layer. Usually these are background services for web and mobile apps, or
part of a network of distributed systems. GraphQL is usually implemented by
exposing a single HTTP endpoint in Rails that receive payloads that are then
processed by a set of GraphQL related objects to translate this data as queries
and mutations according to a previously defined schema.

The GraphQL layer of the Rails app is similar to the controller and view layers:
they should be responsible only for extracting data from incoming payloads,
forward them to Actions, and prepare Action Results for presentation as return
values. queries and mutations should not hold any business logic. Since Actions
and Results have well-defined structures, they are ideal building blocks to
create clear and sustainable GraphQL APIs.

Let’s see some examples in the context of the Blog app. We can enable the
creation of Articles via the GraphQL API through a mutation that receives the
values as arguments and returns the proper Result fields. Since all our
mutations will return a Result, they are sure to include fields such as a
success boolean and an optional collection of errors. These can be defined in a
mutation base class:

```ruby
# app/graphql/mutations/base_mutation.rb

module Mutations
  class BaseMutation < GraphQL::Schema::Mutation
    field_class Types::BaseField

    field :success, Boolean, null: false
    field :errors, [Types::ErrorType], null: false
  end
end
```

Note that the errors field in the mutation base is an array of errors as defined
by the Error type. Each error should include a message, an error code, and an
optional field to make it easier for API clients to understand them accordingly.

```ruby
# app/graphql/types/error_type.rb

module Types
  class ErrorType < BaseObject
    field :field, String, null: true
    field :code, String, null: false
    field :message, String, null: false
  end
end
```

Now we can go ahead and implement the Create Article mutation:

```ruby
# app/graphql/mutations/create_article.rb

module Mutations
  class CreateArticle < BaseMutation
    argument :title, String, required: true
    argument :email, String, required: true
    argument :body, String, required: true

    field :article, Types::ArticleType, null: true

    def resolve(title:, email:, body:)
      input = ArticleInput.new(title: title, email: email, body: body)

      CreateArticleAction.new.perform(input)
    end
  end
end
```

```ruby
# app/graphql/types/article_type.rb

module Types
  class ArticleType < BaseObject
    field :title, String, null: false
    field :email, String, null: false
    field :body, String, null: false
  end
end
```

As seen above, the mutation itself simply instantiates an Input and passes it to
the proper Action. The Result that contains the created Article is then mapped
to the Article GraphQL type seamlessly. In case of errors, the mutation will
have an empty article field but the errors field will be populated with the
proper messages and codes. All of that without ever leaking business logic into
the GraphQL layer.
