---
tags: en
layout: article
title: Coffee
date: 2020-08-26 15:15:00 -05:00
---

I didn’t really drink coffee growing up. Despite being born and raised in
Brazil, in which everybody, including kids, consume the dark liquid every
morning. For most of my life, drinking coffee was an unpleasant experience: I
couldn’t understand how swallowing a bitter, charcoal-taste thing was a good
idea. In order to be drinkable it required enough cream and sugar, but at that
point I would simply jump on the hot chocolate wagon anyway.

It was only in my mid-twenties that coffee got me, when I randomly ended up with
access to a professional espresso machine. Although I wasn’t a coffee drinker
just yet, there was something about steam, valves, and pressure being used to
produce milk-based coffee beverages that just fascinated me. Learning how to use
the machine and make lattes was fun, despite having a cup of coffee that had to
be consumed in the end.

And consume it I did. What once was unpleasant became tolerable. And the
tolerable became a routine. However at that point my daily dose of coffee was
due to its energizing effect and familiarity, and by the fact that I enjoyed
preparing the cup. The drink wasn’t objectively good. Like most people, I was
drinking bad coffee every day.

A few years ago I discovered specialty coffee. Luckily Montreal has a growing
number of independent coffee shops that serve high quality coffee. And I was
blown away. Good coffee was unlike anything I had ever tasted. The cup had a
delicious, complex aroma, and it wasn’t bitter like my previous experiences. I
savoured hints of chocolate, caramel, nuts, and much more. I wanted to sip it
ever so slowly in order to extend the experience. And I was tossed once and for
all into the specialty coffee rabbit hole.

I was thirsty for good coffee and for knowledge. Why is that kind of coffee so
different? What make it special? I devoured any resource I could find. I learned
about different coffee origins. Varieties of Arabica. How coffee is processed,
roasted, and brewed. And how complex such fruit (yes, coffee is a fruit!) can be
in terms of tasting experience.

Most importantly, I learned about the reality of how coffee is produced. Sadly
the big coffee industry still reflects practices inherited from centuries of
colonialism and exploitation from wealthy imperialist nations imposed on small
communities in tropical countries. Producing coffee is a very hard job for which
farmers and their families get incredibly underpaid, and the result of that
labour ends up exported to the top consuming countries, mostly in Europe and
North America.

Specialty coffee attempts to reduce this inequality by recognizing the
producer’s work in the achievement of high quality beans and granting them a
better pay. Like wine, coffee is a product of terroir, and the estate, region,
altitude, and practices employed in its growth is what makes it special and
delicious. I find much joy in tracing the beans’ origins, the country, region
and farmer, which is possible with specialty beans, and to know whose hard work
I should be grateful for my cup of coffee.

Today coffee is more than just a morning ritual in my life. Coffee is the
discovery of flavours, the pleasure of learning new techniques and breaking the
rules. It’s about enjoying the company of loved ones, having great
conversations, and meditating over good memories. Coffee is about travelling
long distances, experiencing different cultures, and making new friends. Or
simply embarking on a trip without ever leaving my place, sipping the tropical
flavours of a beautifully brewed cup in a cold Montreal morning.
